---
title: dart doc
description: >-
   Learn how to generate HTML-reference documentation for public Dart libraries.
---

The `dart doc` command generates HTML reference documentation
for Dart source code.

## Write documentation {:#write}

To add reference text and examples to the generated documentation,
use [documentation comments][] with [Markdown][] formatting.
For guidance on writing doc comments,
check out the [Effective Dart: Documentation][] guide.

[documentation comments]: /language/comments#documentation-comments
[Markdown]: {{site.pub-pkg}}/markdown
[Effective Dart: Documentation]: /effective-dart/documentation

## Generate API docs {:#generate}

:::note
To generate documentation,
you must first run [`dart pub get`](/tools/pub/cmd/pub-get)
and your package must pass [`dart analyze`](/tools/dart-analyze)
without errors.
:::

To generate the documentation for your package,
run `dart doc .` from the package's root directory.
For example, generating the API docs for a `my_package` package
could resemble the following:

```console
$ cd my_package
$ dart pub get
$ dart doc .
Documenting my_package...
...
Success! Docs generated into /Users/me/projects/my_package/doc/api
```

By default, `dart doc` places the generated documentation
and supporting files in the `doc/api` directory.
To change the output directory, specify
a path with the `--output` flag:

```console
$ dart doc --output=api_docs .
```

If there are any issues with your package setup or documentation comments,
`dart doc` outputs them as errors or warnings.
If you just want to test for issues without saving the generated documentation,
add the `--dry-run` flag:

```console
$ dart doc --dry-run .
```

### Configure generation {:#configure}

To configure how `dart doc` generates documentation, create a
file named `dartdoc_options.yaml` in the root directory of your package.

To learn more about the file's format and supported configuration options,
check out [dart.dev/go/dartdoc-options-file][dartdoc-options].

{% comment %}
TODO: Document the long-term supported options here.
{% endcomment -%}

[dartdoc-options]: https://dart.dev/go/dartdoc-options-file

## View generated docs {:#view}

You can view docs generated with `dart doc` in a variety of ways.

### View local docs {:#view-local}

To view API docs you generated with `dart doc` or downloaded from online,
you must load them with an HTTP server.

To serve the files, use any HTTP server.
Consider using [`package:dhttpd`][] from pub.dev.

To use `package:dhttpd`, activate it globally, then run it
and specify the path of your generated docs.
The following commands activate the package,
then runs it to serve the API docs located at `doc/api`:

```console
$ dart pub global activate dhttpd
$ dart pub global run dhttpd --path doc/api
```

To then read the generated docs in your browser,
open the link that `dhttpd` outputs, usually `http://localhost:8080`.

[`package:dhttpd`]: https://pub.dev/packages/dhttpd

### View hosted docs {:#view-hosted}

You can also host your generated API docs online
using any hosting service that supports static web content.
Two common options are [Firebase hosting][] and [GitHub pages][].

[Firebase hosting]: https://firebase.google.com/docs/hosting
[GitHub pages]: https://pages.github.com/

### View package docs {:#view-pub}

The [pub.dev site]({{site.pub}}) generates and hosts
documentation for an uploaded package's public libraries.

To view a package's generated docs,
navigate to its page and open the **API reference** link
in the info box on the right side of the page.
For example, you can find the API docs for `package:http`
at [pub.dev/documentation/http]({{site.pub-api}}/http).

### View core library docs {:#view-sdk}

`dart doc` is also used to generate the API reference documentation for
the Dart core libraries.

To view the Dart SDK reference docs, visit the api.dart.dev link
that corresponds to the Dart release channel you are developing with:

| Branch   | Generated docs                              |
|----------|---------------------------------------------|
| `stable` | [api.dart.dev/stable]({{site.dart-api}})    |
| `beta`   | [api.dart.dev/beta]({{site.dart-api}}/beta) |
| `dev`    | [api.dart.dev/dev]({{site.dart-api}}/dev)   |
| `main`   | [api.dart.dev/main]({{site.dart-api}}/main) |

{:.table .table-striped}

## Troubleshoot

To identify and resolve common issues with docs generated with `dart doc`,
consult the following reference section.

### Search bar failed to load {:#troubleshoot-search}

If the generated documentation's search bars aren't functional or
include text similar to "Failed to initialize search",
one of the following scenarios is possible:

1. You are accessing the docs from your own file system,
   but they aren't being served and loaded with an HTTP server.
   To learn how to serve local API docs,
   check out [how to view generated docs locally](#view-local).
2. The `index.json` file generated by `dart doc` is missing or inaccessible
   from the documentation directory or your hosted web server.
   Try regenerating the docs and validating your hosting configuration.

### Sidebar failed to load {:#troubleshoot-sidebar}

If the generated documentation's sidebars are missing or
include text similar to "Failed to load sidebar",
one of the following scenarios is possible:

1. You are accessing the docs from your own file system,
   but the docs aren't being served and loaded with an HTTP server.
   To learn how to serve local API docs,
   check out [how to view local docs](#view-local).
2. The generated docs' base-href behavior is configured.
   This configuration option is deprecated and should no longer be used.
   Try removing the option and using the default behavior of `dart doc`.
   If the default behavior breaks links in your generated docs,
   please [file an issue][].

[file an issue]: https://github.com/dart-lang/dartdoc/issues

### Missing API documentation {:#troubleshoot-missing}

If you can't find or access the generated documentation
for an API you expect to have docs,
one of the following scenarios is possible:

1. The package does not expose the API you are looking for as a public API.
   `dart doc` only generates documentation for public libraries and members
   that are exposed for other packages to import and use.
   To learn more about configuring a package's public libraries,
   check out the package layout guide on [public libraries][].
2. The URL you are attempting to access has incorrect capitalization.
   By default, `dart doc` generates filenames that are case-sensitive,
   match their corresponding source declarations, and have a `.html` extension.
   Try verifying the URL matches these expectations.

[public libraries]: /tools/pub/package-layout#public-libraries

### Text where icons should be {:#troubleshoot-icons}

If you see text instead of icons like the menu and theme buttons,
your browser was likely unable to load the Material Symbols font.
Some options to solve this include:

1. Try using a proxy that enables access to the Google Fonts servers.
2. Update the generated pages to use a local version of the font.
