# Doc comment references

Doc comments can contain references to various code elements. A library member
or class member, etc. can be referenced by wrapping its name in square brackets
(`[...]`) in a doc comment (a comment starting with `///`). Examples:

```dart
/// Returns a [String].
String f() => 'Hello';

/// Wraps [object] with [Future.value].
Future<T> g<T>(T object) => Future.value(object);
```

These doc comments contain references to the `String` class, the `object`
parameter, and the `Future.value` constructor.

## Features of references

There are several benefits to refering to a code element in a doc comment as a
doc comment reference:

### Editor features

Doc comment references enable several IDE features. An element's name can be
code-completed within square brackets. When an element is renamed via an IDE
command, it can rewrite uses of that element, including references in doc
comments. When an IDE lists all "references" to an element, it can include
references in doc comments. An IDE can also provide Go-to-definition support at
the location of a doc comment reference.

### API documentation

In API documentation generated by `dart doc`, a doc comment reference is
linked, if possible, to the documentation page of the element being referenced.
If the element does not have a documentation page (for example, a function
parameter, a type variable, or a private class), then no link is created.

## What can be referenced

Most library members can be referenced in a doc comment, including classes,
constants, enums, named extensions, extension types, functions, mixins, and
type aliases. This includes all in-scope library members, either declared
locally, or imported. Library members which are imported with an import prefix
can be referenced with the prefix. Examples:

```dart
import 'dart:math' as math;

/// [List] is in scope.
/// So is [math.max].
int x = 7;
```

Most members of a class, an enum, an extension, an extension type, and a mixin
can also be referenced. A reference to a member that is not in scope must be
qualified with it's container's name. For example the `wait` static method on
the `Future` class can be referenced in a doc comment with `[Future.wait]`.
This is true for instance members as well; the `add` method and the `length`
property on the `List` class can be referenced with `[List.add]` and
`[List.length]`. In-scope members like these can even be referenced without the
qualifying container name:

```dart
abstract class MyList<E> implements List<E> {
  /// Refer to [add] and [contains], which is declared on [Iterable].
  void myMethod() {}
}

Parameters of a function and parameters of a function type can be referenced in
a doc comment only when they are in scope. They can therefore only be
referenced within a doc comment on such a parameter's function or on a type
alias for such a paramter's enclosing function type.

Type parameters can be referenced in a doc comment only when they are in scope.
Therefore a type parameter of a method, top-level function, or type alias can
only be referenced within a doc comment on that element, and a type parameter
of a class, enum, extension, extension type, and mixin can only be referenced
within a doc comment on that element or on one of its members.

The doc comment for a type alias which aliases a class, enum, extension type,
or mixin cannot reference any of the aliased type's members, if it has any, as
if they were in scope.
