---
layout: top
title: Platforms
description: "You can use Dart when writing web apps, standalone apps, servers, mobile apps, and embedded apps."
toc: true
---

Dart is a scalable platform that you can use to write simple scripts or full
featured apps. Whether you're creating a mobile app, web app, command-line
script, or server-side app, there's a Dart solution for that.

The Dart platform contains flexible compiler technology that enables running
Dart code in two ways:

  * **Dart Native**: For programs targeting devices (mobile, desktop, server,
    etc.), Dart Native includes both a Dart VM with JIT (just-in-time)
    compilation and a Dart AOT (ahead-of-time) compiler for producing machine
    code for ARM of X86.
  * **Dart Web**: For programs targeting the web, Dart Web includes both a
    development time compiler (`dartdevc`), and a production time compiler
    (`dart2js`).

<img src="images/platforms.png" alt="Dart platform run-times">

## Dart Native (VM & AOT)

The Dart Native platform enables running Dart code compiled to native ARM or X86
machine code for apps running on mobile, desktop, and server.

More information: [A tour of Dart Native](/tutorials/server/get-started), [Tutorial: Command-line apps](), [Tutorial: client/server apps]().

### Lightning fast developer workflow (Dart VM)

During development having a fast developer cycle is critical to enable fast
iteration. 

The Dart VM supports both pure intrepretation (as required on for example iOS
devices), and runtime optimization via a just-in-time compiler (JIT).

More information: [`dart` VM tool](/tools/dart2aot)

### Optimized production code (Dart AOT)

When apps are ready to be deployed to production (i.e., published to an app
store, or be deployed to a production backend), the Dart AOT compiler can be
used to Ahead-of-time compile them to native ARM and x86 code machine code. This
ensures that your app starts instantly (as no code needs to be compiled), and
runs smoothly.

The AOT code is run inside an efficient Dart run-time, which ensures the sound
Dart type system is enforced, and which manages Dart memory with high
performance through Dartâ€™s fast object allocation and [generational garbage
collector](https://medium.com/flutter-io/flutter-dont-fear-the-garbage-collector-d69b3ff1ca30).

More information: [`dart2aot` tool](/tools/dart2aot)

## Dart Web (JS)

The Dart Web platform enables running Dart code on web platforms powered by
JavaScript. It does so by transpiling Dart code to JavaScript code, which is
turn run in a JS browser run-time (e.g. [V8](https://v8.dev/) inside
[Chrome](https://www.google.com/chrome/)).

More information: [A tour of Dart Web](/web/get-started)

### Lightning fast developer workflow (Dart Dev compiler)

The Dart Web platform enables fast development via the Dart Dev Compiler
(`dartdevc`), a dedicated JS transpiler optimized for quick turn-around. This is
paired with `webdev`, a web-specific end-to-end CLI (command-line interface)
tool that supports core developer tasks such as running, debugging, and
building.

More information:
[`dartdevc` compiler](/tools/dartdevc),
[`webdev` tool](/tools/webdev)

### Optimized production code (Dart JS compiler)

The `dart2js` tool compiles Dart code to fast & compact, deployable JavaScript.
It employes a number of techniques such as dead-code elimination, 

More information: [`dart2js` compiler](/tools/dart2js), [`webdev`
tool](/tools/webdev), [deployment tips](/web/deployment)
